Draft release notes for 3.2.0 and 3.1.2 (#4600)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: draft-release-notes.md

### Security

  -  Support for OAuth2 Device Authorization flow with additional `deviceAuthorization` field in the `flows` object and for the individual flow, a new field `deviceAuthorizationUrl` alongside `tokenUrl`
  - additional security scheme field: `oauth2MetadataUrl` URL for auth server metadata
  - additional `deprecated` field for security schemes (indicating that the scheme may still be supported, but that it should not be used)
  - ability to reference a security scheme by URI rather than needing it declared in components.

### Servers 

  - clarify that server URLs should not include fragment or query.
  - support new `name` field alongside `description`, `url` and `variables`.
  - formal path templating support for variable substitution in server urls.

### Discriminator

  - no change from previous versions: use `discriminator` to hint which entry in `anyOf` or `oneOf` is expected.
  - no change from previous versions: use `mapping` to link the discriminator property value to the Schema name if they aren't an exact match.
  - the discriminator `propertyName` can now be an optional field.

>   - additional `defaultMapping` field to indicate which schema to use if the `propertyName` is not set, or if the value is unrecognized.

Reviewer: `Code Generation`

> ### Discriminator
> 
>   - no change from previous versions: use `discriminator` to hint which entry in `anyOf` or `oneOf` is expected.
>   - no change from previous versions: use `mapping` to link the discriminator property value to the Schema name if they aren't an exact match.
>   - the discriminator `propertyName` can now be an optional field.
>   - additional `defaultMapping` field to indicate which schema to use if the `propertyName` is not set, or if the value is unrecognized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Code Generation

  - the discriminator `propertyName` can now be an optional field.
  - additional `defaultMapping` field to indicate which schema to use if the `propertyName` is not set, or if the value is unrecognized.
  - no change from previous versions: use `discriminator` to hint which entry in `anyOf` or `oneOf` is expected.
  - no change from previous versions: use `mapping` to link the discriminator property value to the Schema name if they aren't an exact match.
  - Implementations now SHOULD (rather than MAY) support templates/generics using `$dynamicRef`
```

(thanks @jeremyfiel )

### Reference resolution

  - additional top-level `$self` to be used as a base URI for resolving references in the OpenAPI description. If not present, the existing/earlier behaviour of using the retrieval URL as a base applies.

### **ABNF** (Augmented Backus–Naur Form) formalised for path templating, server variables, and runtime expressions in the Links object.

### Improvements for APIs using XML as a content format

  - XML namespaces can be IRIs (rather than URIs)
  - Explanation and example on how to handle `null` in XML
    Clarify that the root schema of an XML object should use the component name.

### Sequential media type

>   - Support for sequential mediatypes such as `text/event-stream` for server-sent events (SSE) and `application/jsonl`, `application/json-seq` and others for sequential data. 

Reviewer 3: "media types" or "media-types"

  - Related: a new media types registry is published to give more context for each of the media types
  - Also a "Complete vs Streaming Content" section for guidance on streaming binary payloads

### Parameters

  - additional parameter location `querystring`, to allow parsing the entire query string as a single field similar to the way a request body is handled, using the `content` field. Useful for complex or unconventional query data. Mutually exclusive with the `query` field.
  - parameters can therefore be `in` the `querystring` as an alternative to the existing `header`, `cookie`, `query` and `path` values.
  - `allowReserved` field is now permitted on parameters with any value of `in` (however this many not be a Good Idea (TM) in some scenarios)
    
### Responses

  - `description` field for responses are now optional (they used to be required but they could be empty)
  - additional `summary` field for responses, useful when displaying responses in a list context

### Minor edits that are worth a mention:

  - Streamlined to YAML examples (unless something specific to another format) to try to make it easier to follow

>   - `allowReserved` is now supported for any parameter or header, regardless of `in` location

Author: Thanks, updated.

### In-place updates to existing specifications and standards that we reference:

  - Update to https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html of JSON Schema Specification
  - Update to https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-validation-01.html of JSON Schema Validation Specification
  - Use [RFC8529](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8259) for JSON
  - Use [RFC9110](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc9110) for HTTP

### Editorial changes:

  - Extensive additions around media types, encoding, sequential media types, SSE examples, working with binary data,
  - Clarification that Example Objects can be used in Header Objects.
  - Better explanation and examples for using Encoding.
  - Clarify that Request Body Objects need to specify at least one media type to be meaningful
  - How to more clearly indicate that responses will not have a body

## 3.1 Updates

Version 3.1.2 has no material changes but does contain editorial fixes.

> - Clarification that Example Objects can be used in Header Objects.

Author: removed from the 3.1 section, I don't think we changed anything here

- Related: a new media types registry is published to give more context for each of the media types.
- Also a "Complete vs Streaming Content" section for guidance on streaming binary payloads.

### Parameter and header changes

- Additional parameter location `querystring`, to allow parsing the entire query string as a single field similar to the way a request body is handled, using the `content` field. Useful for complex or unconventional query data. Mutually exclusive with the `query` field.
- Parameters can therefore be `in` the `querystring` as an alternative to the existing `header`, `cookie`, `query` and `path` values.
- `allowReserved` field is now permitted on headers and on parameters with any value of `in`.
- Remove incorrect mention of Reference Object in the header `schema` field. The JSONSchema ref would be the correct thing to use in this context.

### Flexible response metadata fields

- `description` field for responses are now optional (they used to be required but they could be empty).
- Additional `summary` field for responses, useful when displaying responses in a list context.

### Minor edits that are worth a mention

> - Streamlined to YAML examples (unless something specific to another format) to try to make it easier to follow.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Streamlined to YAML examples (unless something specific to another format) to try to make it easier to follow.
- Non-Schema examples no longer "override" Schema examples; tools are free to use the most appropriate example for any given use case
```

# [DRAFT]: Release Notes

What's coming up? Look at `src/oas.md` on the relevant development branch for full details.

## 3.2 Updates

All the changes in the OpenAPI 3.2 release.

### Headline features

A summary of the biggest changes.

#### Nested, multipurpose tags

- New `summary` field to allow short descriptions, used when displaying lists of tags. If you use the `x-displayName` extension, you can now use `summary` instead.
- `parent` field to point to the tag that this tag is nested under. If you use `x-tagGroups`, adjust to use a tags hierarchy.

> - `kind` to allow multiple categories of tag. The `kind` field is free-form text, however there are some expected/conventional values such as `nav` (in line with the most common current usage as grouping for documentation output).

Reviewer 4: Found this one: https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/29843/types-of-followed-by-singular-or-plural.

Nice rule of thumb: turn the sentence around and see how it sounds:
1. to allow tag of multiple categories
2. to allow tags of multiple categories

Only the second one makes sense to me.

> - `kind` to allow multiple categories of tag. The `kind` field is free-form text, however there are some expected/conventional values such as `nav` (in line with the most common current usage as grouping for documentation output).

Author: I think maybe it needs an article, I'll try rewording

- A new key `mediaTypes` is supported under `components` to support re-use of Media Type Objects.

#### In-place updates to existing specifications and standards that we reference

- Update to <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html> of JSON Schema Specification.
- Update to <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-validation-01.html> of JSON Schema Validation Specification.
- Use [RFC8529](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8259) for JSON.
- Use [RFC9110](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc9110) for HTTP.

#### Editorial changes

- Extensive additions around media types, encoding, sequential media types, SSE examples, working with binary data.
- Better explanation and examples for using Encoding.
- Clarify that Request Body Objects need to specify at least one media type to be meaningful.
- How to more clearly indicate that responses will not have a body.
- Explanation and examples of headers including `Link` and `Set-Cookie`.
- No change but extensive additional notes on parsing and serializing JSON and non-JSON data formats.

>   Particularly if you are buildling OpenAPI tooling, this section gives much better guidance on some of those tricky edge cases.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Particularly if you are building OpenAPI tooling, this section gives much better guidance on some of those tricky edge cases.
```

# [DRAFT]: Release Notes

What's coming up? Look at `src/oas.md` on the relevant development branch for full details.

## 3.2 Updates

All the changes in the OpenAPI 3.2 release.

### Headline features

A summary of the biggest changes.

#### Nested, multipurpose tags

> - New `summary` field to allow short descriptions, used when displaying lists of tags. If you use the `x-displayName` extension, you can now use `summary` instead.

Reviewer 3: should we identify which tool(s) this exension is for?

Author: I think that an exhaustive list would be very difficult - I certainly couldn't get this correct without a lot of research. And the tools don't matter too much - I tried to word it so that you know what to look for in your OpenAPI description and how to update that.

                  items:
                    type: string
                  example: ["price:asc", "rating:desc"]
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Search results
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: array
                items:
                  $ref: '#/components/schemas/Cake'
    
    additionalOperations:
      LINK:
        summary: Link related cake products
        description: Create associations between cakes and accessories
        requestBody:
          required: true
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                properties:
                  targetResource:
                    type: string
                    example: "/accessories/candles/123"
                  relationship:
                    type: string
                    example: "recommended-with"
        responses:
          '204':
            description: Link created successfully
```

#### Document identity and URL resolution

- Additional top-level field `$self` is added to allow users to define the base URI of the document, used to resolve relative references.

>   If no `$self` field is defined, then the retrieval URI is used - just as it was in previous versions of OpenAPI.

Author: Good catch. I'll reword I think, but I had to go back and double check how that part works (useful as this is a headline feature for the talk version of this material too!)

- Other URL/URI handling does not change between 3.1 and 3.2 (but bears a recap in case you're wondering how it all goes together):
  - Other URLs, such as to external documentation or a license, are resolved against the base URI.
  - Relative links inside `description` fields are resolved relative to their rendered context, such as your published API documentation page.

>   - API endpoints are resolved against the URL in the Server Object, which itself might be relative and resolved against the base URI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - API endpoints (such as /paths entries, and authentication URLs) are resolved against the URL in the Server Object, which itself might be relative and resolved against the base URI.
```

>   - API endpoints are resolved against the URL in the Server Object, which itself might be relative and resolved against the base URI.

Reviewer 2: @karenetheridge the Server Object's `url` field does not use a "base URI" in the RFC3986 sense at all.  It uses the retrieval URI of the document, which _can_, **coincidentally**, be the base URI, but is not always (there is only one base URI for the resource, there are just multiple possible sources from which it might come, some of which might be base URIs _for other sources in the list_ but not for the document as a whole).

>   - API endpoints are resolved against the URL in the Server Object, which itself might be relative and resolved against the base URI.

Reviewer 3: That doesn't make sense at all. Let's pick this up when you're back. I think we are not using this terminology in the same way.

The following example shows the new `$self` field in use:

```yaml
openapi: 3.2.0
$self: https://cake-api.example.com/openapi.yaml
info:
  title: Cake Store API
  version: 1.0.3
  description: API for managing cake orders and inventory
```

### Data modeling and representation

OpenAPI specification v3.2 brings consistent, modular, and extensible media type and parameter support, while also expanding the set of media types supported in response to both emerging and legacy use cases. In addition, the ambiguity regarding how to present examples in a variety of complex scenarios is reduced.

There is also a new Media Types Registry, to provide further resources for working with different media types.

#### Support for sequential media types

- Support for sequential media types such as `text/event-stream` for server-sent events (SSE) and `multipart/mixed`, `application/jsonl`, `application/json-seq` and others for sequential data.
- Responses can be a repeating data structure, and are treated as if they are an array of schema objects.

> - Use `itemSchema` in a mediatype entry to describe each item.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use `itemSchema` in a media-type entry to describe each item.
```

- Related: a new media types registry is published to give more context for each of the media types.
- Also a "Complete vs Streaming Content" section for guidance on streaming binary payloads.

#### Parameter and header changes

- Additional parameter location `querystring`, to allow parsing the entire query string as a single field similar to the way a request body is handled, using the `content` field. Useful for complex or unconventional query data. Mutually exclusive with the `query` field.
- Parameters can therefore be `in` the `querystring` as an alternative to the existing `header`, `cookie`, `query` and `path` values.
- `allowReserved` field is now permitted on headers and on parameters with any value of `in`, and applies where the combination of `in` and `style` automatically percent-encode the value.

> - Remove incorrect mention of Reference Object in the header `schema` field. The JSON Schema `$ref` would be the correct thing to use in this context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Remove incorrect mention of Reference Object in the header `schema` field, which is redundant with the `$ref` coming from JSON Schema itself.
```

- The `examples` (and older `example`) field is now supported with `content`.

#### Specific `style` option for cookies

> - Additional `style` option `cookie` for content in a cookie, which uses semicolon as a separator and does not encode data values.

Author: Note to self: adapt this for grammar (does not encoding -> does not encode)

> - Additional `style` option `cookie` for content in a cookie, which uses semicolon as a separator and does not encode data values.

Reviewer 2: @lornajane if you want a fixed suggestion (but feel free to do your own):

```suggestion
- Additional `style` option `cookie` for content in a cookie, which conforms to RFC6265 by using a semicolon followed by a space as a separator and by not encoding data values.
```

>   The `form` style is a close fit, but you may wish to switch to `cookie` for more correct description.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The `form` style is a close fit, but you may wish to switch to `cookie` for a more correct description.
```

  - The `itemEncoding` is a single encoding entry that is used for information about multiple items.
- The specification also contains examples of sequential JSON and Server-Sent events that show these fields in use.
- Nested content types are supported to at least one level of nesting.

#### Improvements for APIs using XML as a content format

- New `nodeType` field allows mapping schemas to common XML node types: `element`, `attribute`, `text`, `cdata`, or `none`.
- `attribute: true` is now deprecated in favor of `nodeType: attribute`.
- `wrapped: true` deprecated in favor of `nodeType: element` (as `nodeType` defaults to `none` for arrays to preserve compatibility).
- The `xml` keyword can be used in any Schema Object.
- XML namespaces can be IRIs (rather than URIs).
- Explanation and examples for many use cases including handling `null`, handling arrays, replacing the name, and handling ordered elements.
- Clarify that the root schema of an XML object should use the component name.

#### Describe examples in both structured and serialized forms

- The Example Object (used in `examples` fields) gets two new fields: `dataValue` and `serializedValue`.

> - `dataValue` describes the example in structured format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `dataValue` describes the example in structured format (deserialized into the JSON document model, suitable for evaluating with a `schema`).
```

        name:
          type: string
```

#### Templates with formal syntax

The specification now includes **ABNF** (Augmented Backus–Naur Form) for path templating, server variables, and runtime expressions in the Links object.
This sounds terribly formal but it means that there is a clear syntax for what is supported in each of those locations, that existing tooling can understand.

Next time you're wondering if you can do `/api/v{version}/users/{user-id}` in a path template, it'll be easy to check (spoiler: yes you can).

#### Flexible response metadata fields

- `description` field for responses are now optional (they used to be required but they could be empty).
- Additional `summary` field for responses, useful when displaying responses in a list context.

```yaml
  /cakes:
    get:
      summary: List cakes
      responses:
        '200':
          summary: Cake list
          description: A list of cakes (this field is no longer required)
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: array
                items:
                  type: string
```

#### Minor updates that are worth a mention

> - Non-Schema examples no longer "override" Schema examples; tools are free to use the most appropriate example for any given use case.

Reviewer 2: Please let's not include this.  No one can remember what "override" meant, and given the widespread incorrect implementation of the thing usually doing the "override", this is hard to even explain.  Just let that language quietly disappear.  As best we can tell, it had no practical implications but was instead a somewhat philosophical statement about which examples are closest to the wire format.

- Additional parameter location `querystring`, to allow parsing the entire query string as a single field similar to the way a request body is handled, using the `content` field. Useful for complex or unconventional query data. Mutually exclusive with the `query` field.
- Parameters can therefore be `in` the `querystring` as an alternative to the existing `header`, `cookie`, `query` and `path` values.
- `allowReserved` field is now permitted on headers and on parameters with any value of `in`, and applies where the combination of `in` and `style` automatically percent-encode the value.

> - Remove incorrect mention of Reference Object in the header `schema` field. The JSONSchema ref would be the correct thing to use in this context.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Remove incorrect mention of Reference Object in the header `schema` field. The JSON Schema `$ref` would be the correct thing to use in this context.
```

## 3.1 Updates

Version 3.1.2 has no material changes but does contain editorial fixes, additional examples, and clarifications.

> - Clarify that `$ref` in a Schema Object is a JSONSchema `$ref` keyword.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Clarify that `$ref` in a Schema Object is a JSON Schema `$ref` keyword.
```
